So we added the IDB file,
we're using it in index.html
but of course as you know, the service worker works independent of that page.
So how can we use that package in the service worker?
The answer is by default we can't because the service worker doesn't care about which polyfills or
packages we load in our main project but service workers have a special syntax which allow us
to import other packages and that special syntax is importScripts.
This simply allows us to point to another script which we want to use in that service worker
and this in general allows you to distribute your code across multiple files.
You can of course also use this to make your service worker leaner and outsource some of the code into
a separate file, though I prefer to keep everything in here to have one place where I can quickly see
where I'm handling fetch events and so on
though you could of course also argue for outsourcing this.
Nonetheless what I will do here is I will import that IDB file, so I'll import to /src/js/idb.js/
.
Now of course it would be nice if that also works if we're offline,
so for that I'll also import it into my static files cache,
here I'll also store idb.js,
just as I store promise and fetch to make sure that we can use all the functionality even without
an internet connection
and for that I'll bump up my cache version number here. So this imports idb.js
and now we can use these features in our service worker file.
Now to do so, I'll start by simply storing data when we get it from the database
and do you know where we would do this in our existing service worker file?
Well we can already see in the picture here,
here. Right now we put something on the cache, on the application cache
whenever we get data from the posts URL.
Now I told you that for JSON data, we might prefer indexedDB because there we can really decide or define
what we want to store there.
So this is what I want to do, instead of putting something on the cache here,
I want to put something or store something in indexedDB,
so let's do that. For that, we first of all need to open an indexedDB database and also create an object
store in there.
So I will do this at the top of this file,
maybe after initializing my static files and I'll store the database which can be accessed through a
promise in a variable named dbPromise.
So this will be a variable which in the end can give us access to the database in a promise-like way,
you'll see how it works. Here I'll set it equal to IDB which we can now use due to this import being added,
IDB open and this opens a new database, here
I want to give it a name, like feed-store because it's for my news feed,
you could also name it posts-store. Let's maybe name it like this
now that I think about it because I use posts in Firebase too, so posts-store. We can pass more arguments,
the version number of the database which we can simply bump up if we wanted, if we update it and then
we get back a function.
Now I told you it's promise based but this one function can't be avoided.
This function will execute whenever the database has been created and there, we get back an object which
allows us to access that database
basically. Now here I want to create a new object store which is basically like a table, to create one,
I call dbCreateObjectStore.
Now we can set up this function with two arguments if we want to,
the first one is the name of that store and I will simply name that posts, so we get the database
and now we got the table in there,
the object store.
We can also pass a second argument to that to define an object where we define our primary key of
each object we'll store in that object store,
this allows us to later retrieve objects by that key.
So we simply have to define a property named keyPath here, uppercase P and you have to get that name
right for IDB to understand it and then the value is a string where you define the name of the key
by which you later want to retrieve your data. I'll name this ID,
so if I later add objects to that object store which have an ID property, I can conveniently search for
objects with a given ID if I want to retrieve a single object,
that's the good thing about providing these extra arguments here.
This creates a new object store,
the issue just is we'll use this promise here whenever we want to access the database and there we open
the database,
thus far that's no issue but we always also try to create an object store.
We only want to do that if it doesn't exist yet
and unfortunately, indexedDB and this package doesn't do that for us,
it's not like in the cache where we open a cache and it either creates it or simply opens it,
here it always tries to create it and that of course is not a good idea if we already have it. So therefore
I'll wrap this in an if statement where I check
if we don't have this yet,
so if we don't have it in our given DB here. I can do this by checking object store names,
this will simply give me an array of all the existing objects stores and I can check if that contains
the posts-store or object store and only if that's not the case,
hence the exclamation mark in the beginning,
I try to create it.
So this creates a new object store
and with this promise, I can access this database with this object store.
So let's get rid of our old code here and actually, we don't need to open the cache anymore,
just returning the fetch is all we need to do here,
so let's get rid of that code too, that was too much just delete that and now with that, we're making sure
that whenever we hit this URL, we respond with the fetch
and in this case we just return the response.
And of course, I want to do a little bit more than just that,
instead I want to store that response
or actually the transformed response
also in indexedDB.
Now to do that, I first of all need to create a copy of the response, I'll store it a new, maybe cloned
res variable and I call clone on response here because the original response of course always needs
to be returned
even if I store the other one because otherwise, our fetch requests from our main application will fail.
So here, I'm returning a cloned response or excuse me I'm returning the original response
but I'm cloning it too
and I want to store the transformed clone response, transformed because that's the good thing about
indexedDB,
we don't have to stick to the full response, we can pull out the data we want to store and store just
that data in the database.
So we have the cloned response, on the cloned response I now want to call JSON,
this normal JSON method which of course gives us back a promise as we can confirm the feed.js
file where we return response JSON and then chain another then call,
that's of course possible because this also returns a promise.
So here we know it gives us a promise, so we can call then and can therefore use the data we got back
from the response,
this is now the body data but still not transformed at all. Regarding the transformation, we can have
a look at the feed.js file again,
it's this transformation I want to apply.
Pull out the key-value pairs from the data we get back from Firebase because we don't get back an array
of posts, we get back an object where the keys are the Post IDs,
that's just how the data is stored in Firebase. So I'll copy that loop here into my service worker and
I'll get rid of the data array push thing in the middle
but I want to loop through all the keys in my data,
so though all the posts in the end. Keys of course is just the identifier of the post though.
So with that, we got the data transformed,
now of course I also want to store it in the database
and for that, we use the dbPromise
we set up here at the top.
This gives us access to the database through a promise interface, so we can call then and inside of this
then block in the function here,
we get access to the opened database and to all the object storages
we set up in this promise,
so in this case only to the post storage
but if we had more, we could access them all on this DB object we have here. Now I want to use that DB
object to write some data to the database
and for that, I first of all need to create a transaction which I'll store in the tx variable.
I told you that indexedDB has this transactional operation model,
so basically we have to use transactions for everything we do with the database.
A transaction is easily created by using the DB object we get in this function and calling the transaction
method.
Now this method takes two arguments, the first arguments decides which store do we want to target with
the transaction,
now we only have one, the posts object store, this one
but if we had more, we could of course decide which one to use.
The second argument decides which kind of transaction is it.
Now here you have a couple of options,
the most important ones are read-write or read-only, here it is clearly readwrite, one word, don't mistype
because we want to write something to the database,
reading alone doesn't suffice.
Next we have a store which we have to open,
we do this via the transaction and the object store method.
Now it might look strange because we already defined the store here but that's just how indexedDB
works,
here we basically say what we want to target with the transaction,
then we explicitly have to open the store. Now that we got access to the opened store, we can use that and
put something. Put is one of the methods you can execute on the store and throughout the module,
you'll learn about a lot of other methods you can use, like get and so on.
So here's put
and of course I want to put my data, not the complete data though but the data key which just to bring
this back in memory, is simply this object here,
so the value of this key-value entry here, that's data key.
That's the key,
that's our data, all the different keys if we had more and therefore data key is just a stored value.
This is what I want to store in the database with put.
Now the good thing is in that object we store, we have an ID property, here this ID element property
we stored in that object and I defined that ID would be my keyPath.
So we can easily extract values later if we want to target single values by just pointing to ID because
it's set up as the primary key here for posts.
So with that, we put that data and we have that ID which is required
and now we can close the transaction by returning tx complete.
It's not a method,
it's just a property
and this simply makes sure that this transaction gets executed, that the put operation gets done and
we have to use a transaction even if we only have one operation like we do have here.
And with that, we're executing this for every item in this loop and we safely store data in the database
with that.
So now with this stored and of course our transaction completed and the original request still returned,
that's important so that our app still works,
let's see if it works,
so let's go back to the application and let's clear the site data as always.
Now of course as always you could also reload the page, close the tab and reopen it,
I just want to make sure that the cache is clean though because we want made some significant changes
to that.
So let's reload the application now and with that reloaded,
it still loads here. Now in our application tab,
if we reload refresh indexedDB, we should see that there is a posts-store database with a posts
object store which is empty though.
That makes sense because our service worker was just installed and doesn't manage this page yet.
If we reload one more time though, we should see that now in the application here, if we refresh that, we
now have that key values store here in posts.
So we have our first post ID which is simply extracted from there and was used as a key because we
set up the keyPath to be ID and that we now have the object on the right, exactly the object we got
from our Firebase database.
Now in the console if we reload one more time, we also see that on the next call of course, it's not getting
it from the cache because we only wrote the logic to put it there but not the logic to get it from there.
So this is what I'll do next.